                   Logical Neural Networks
                      Opening The Black Box
                        COMP 489 Project
                        Daniel Braithwaite
                     Supervisor: Marcus Frean
Daniel Braithwaite        Logical Neural Networks Supervisor: Marcus Frean 1 / 14
Introduction + Motivation
 Difficult to interpret Artificial Neural Networks using standard activations,
 e.g., Sigmoid, TanH.
 Why Interpretable Systems?
       Safety Critical Systems
       Ensuring systems make Ethical decisions
       European Union General Data Protection Regulation
        Daniel Braithwaite         Logical Neural Networks Supervisor: Marcus Frean 2 / 14
Problem Statement
   Want Artificial Neural Networks which can achieve a high accuracy.
   Want Artificial Neural Networks which have an interpretable learned
   model so their predictions can be defended
    Daniel Braithwaite       Logical Neural Networks Supervisor: Marcus Frean 3 / 14
Idea
     Some problems appear to have a logical decomposition
     Logical functions are a natural thing for humans to interpret
     Goal: Learn these logical decompositions using Backpropagation
     Problem: Standard Boolean Logic Gates are not continuous.
      Daniel Braithwaite       Logical Neural Networks Supervisor: Marcus Frean 4 / 14
Noisy-OR Relation
    Foundation for the Logic based activation functions which are
    presented.
    C = OR(x1 , ..., xn ), so P(C = 0|xi = 1∀i) = 0
    What if there is uncertainty
                             Q       that input i influences C. Then
    P(C = 0|xi = 1∀i) = P(C = 0|xi = 1)
                                                  Q
    Therefore P(C = 1|xi = 1∀i) = 1 − i
     Daniel Braithwaite         Logical Neural Networks    Supervisor: Marcus Frean 5 / 14
Noisy Neurons
    Noisy-OR neuron essentially the noisy or relation, but there is also
    uncertainty as to the i’th input being on.
    xi ∈ [0, 1] is probability the i’th input is on.
    i ∈ [0, 1] is the probability that input i is irrelevant. The ’s are the
    learned weights
    Post-training it is possible to view these neurons as logical functions
    of their inputs that have low weights.
    There exists Noisy-AND and Noisy-OR Neurons.
     Daniel Braithwaite          Logical Neural Networks   Supervisor: Marcus Frean 6 / 14
Approach: Logical Neural Networks
Logical Neural Networks have layers consisting of Noisy Neurons. Can be
trained with Backpropagation.
Problem: Weight Initialization
     Even small networks would not train.
     Derived a distribution from which to sample weights.
     Now large networks can be trained, including deep Logical Networks.
     Up to 10 layers deep were tested!
      Daniel Braithwaite       Logical Neural Networks Supervisor: Marcus Frean 7 / 14
Experimental Approach
   Want to evaluate accuracy and interpretability of Logical Neural
   Networks
   Implement in Tensorflow.
   Will use MNIST problem.
   Accuracy: Networks trained from 30 different initial conditions,
   accuracy compared using confidence intervals obtained from
   evaluation of the network on a testing set.
   Interpretability: Difficult to establish. Results are obtained by
   visually comparing interpretations of the weights from different
   networks.
    Daniel Braithwaite        Logical Neural Networks  Supervisor: Marcus Frean 8 / 14
Experimental Results: Accuracy
   Logical Neural Networks have statistically equivalent accuracy to
   Multi-Layer Perceptron Networks.
    Daniel Braithwaite     Logical Neural Networks   Supervisor: Marcus Frean 9 / 14
Experimental Results: Interpretability
   Logical Neural Networks are potentially more interpretable that
   Multi-Layer Perceptron Networks.
   Interpretability of Logical Neural Networks depends on activations
   used.
    Daniel Braithwaite         Logical Neural Networks Supervisor: Marcus Frean 10 / 14
Experimental Results: Interpretability - No Hidden
Pictures represent the weights in learned the models, specifically the
output neuron representing a 0. Dark regions are most important, and
white is irrelevant.
Figure: Features for a
perceptron network
                                             Figure: Logical Neural Network
                                             using an AND activation
      Daniel Braithwaite      Logical Neural Networks        Supervisor: Marcus Frean 11 / 14
Experimental Results: Interpretability - Hidden Layer
In this case, pictures represent an important feature for classifying an
instance as a 1.
Figure: Features that positively
contribute to the classification
as a 1.
                                                Figure: Features contributing to
                                                classification of a 1 in an AND
                                                → OR Model
      Daniel Braithwaite         Logical Neural Networks          Supervisor: Marcus Frean 12 / 14
Conclusion
Did we succeed in solving the problem? Well... Yes and No
    Logical Neural Networks are a promising alternative to Multi-Layer
    Perceptron Networks.
    Can train shallow and deep networks with good accuracy.
    Interpretability on MNIST was ”better”. However, this is difficult to
    establish.
    Was found that interpreting Logical Neural Networks became difficult
    with multiple layers.
     Daniel Braithwaite      Logical Neural Networks Supervisor: Marcus Frean 13 / 14
                   Questions
Daniel Braithwaite  Logical Neural Networks Supervisor: Marcus Frean 14 / 14
